docs/concepts/where_and_row_view.md, before:

# Row‑Level Filtering with `where`

Once you have a joined stream, you usually want to keep only the rows that matter. In LQR you do this with `where`, which behaves like a SQL `WHERE` clause but in plain Lua.

---

## Where `where` sits in the pipeline

Within a single `Query` builder chain, `where` runs **after** any joins that come before it in the chain, and **before** later steps such as grouping, projection, or subscription. You can also use `where` on selection‑only queries (no joins at all).

`where` always sees the joined row produced by the steps before it and behaves like a simple filter: for each row, your predicate decides “keep or drop?”. It does not reorder or buffer records; join windows and per‑key buffers still decide which records can reach `where` in the first place.

---

## The row view in practice

To keep predicates readable, the high‑level API exposes each joined emission as a **row view**:

```lua
row = {
  customers = { id = 1, name = "Ada", RxMeta = { ... } } or {},
  orders    = { id = 10, total = 50, RxMeta = { ... } } or {},
}
```

Think of `row` as “one table per schema in the query”, with missing partners represented as empty tables. See `records_and_schemas.md` if you want the full data‑structure details.

---

## Examples

### Left join with a missing right side

```lua
local query =
  Query.from(customers, "customers")
    :leftJoin(orders, "orders")
    :on({ customers = "id", orders = "customerId" })
    :joinWindow({ count = 1000 })
    :where(function(row)
      -- keep VIP customers that currently have a matching order row
      return row.customers.segment == "VIP"
         and row.orders.id ~= nil
    end)
```

Because `row.orders` is always a table, you can safely write `row.orders.id` without extra guards; missing partners simply show up as `nil` fields.

---

## How `where` behaves in a streaming join

From a streaming perspective, `where` is deliberately simple. Conceptually it is the Rx `filter` operator applied to the joined stream, but with LQR‑specific advantage of works on the row view, and is guaranteed to sit in the right place relative to joins and grouping.

- It does **not** change join windows or per‑key buffers.
- For each incoming row:
  - if `predicate(row)` is truthy, the row passes through;
  - otherwise it is dropped.
- Completion and errors flow through as they would for a normal Rx `filter`.

In practice:

- Tune **join windows** and **per‑key buffers** to control “what can reach where”.
- Use `where` to express “of those rows, which ones do I actually care about?”.
- The `expired()` side channel is unaffected: records dropped by `where` still age out of join/distinct/group windows as usual and will appear on `query:expired()` when their window closes.

---

## Writing good predicates

A few guidelines for `where` predicates:

- **Think SQL `WHERE`, but in Lua.**  
  Combine schema fields freely, e.g. `o.total < c.creditLine`, `zombies.count > rooms.capacity`, etc.

- **Be explicit about missing partners.**  
  Decide what “no order” or “no zombie in this room” means for your logic (drop the row, or treat it as safe).

- **Keep `where` for row‑level logic, not aggregates.**  
  `where` sees individual joined rows, not grouped aggregates. If you want to filter based on counts or sums over a group (“at least 3 orders in the last minute”), use `groupBy` / `groupByEnrich` plus `having` in the grouping stage, not `where`.

- **Keep them cheap and side‑effect light.**  
  Predicates run once per row in the stream; avoid blocking I/O or heavy work inside them.

With this mental model, `where` stays close to its SQL cousin while remaining a predictable, streaming‑friendly filter over joined rows.

Commit message:

Adds distinct and debug and clarifies core join and window concepts better

docs/concepts/where_and_row_view.md, after:

# Row‑Level Filtering with `where`

Once you have a joined stream, you usually want to keep only the rows that matter. In LQR you do this with `where`, which behaves like a SQL `WHERE` clause but in plain Lua.

---

## Where `where` sits in the pipeline

Within a single `Query` builder chain, `where` runs **after** any joins that come before it in the chain, and **before** later steps such as grouping, projection, or subscription. You can also use `where` on selection‑only queries (no joins at all).

`where` always sees the joined row produced by the steps before it and behaves like a simple filter: for each row, your predicate decides “keep or drop?”. It does not reorder or buffer records; join windows and per‑key buffers still decide which records can reach `where` in the first place.

---

## The row view in practice

To keep predicates readable, the high‑level API exposes each joined emission as a **row view**:

```lua
row = {
  customers = { id = 1, name = "Ada", RxMeta = { ... } } or {},
  orders    = { id = 10, total = 50, RxMeta = { ... } } or {},
}
```

Think of `row` as “one table per schema in the query”, with missing partners represented as empty tables. The full row view also carries `_raw_result` with the underlying `JoinResult` as described in `records_and_schemas.md`; in this concept we focus on the per‑schema tables you normally use in `where` predicates.

---

## Examples

### Left join with a missing right side

```lua
local query =
  Query.from(customers, "customers")
    :leftJoin(orders, "orders")
    :on({ customers = "id", orders = "customerId" })
    :joinWindow({ count = 1000 })
    :where(function(row)
      -- keep VIP customers that currently have a matching order row
      return row.customers.segment == "VIP"
         and row.orders.id ~= nil
    end)
```

Because `row.orders` is always a table, you can safely write `row.orders.id` without extra guards; missing partners simply show up as `nil` fields.

---

## How `where` behaves in a streaming join

From a streaming perspective, `where` is deliberately simple. Conceptually it is the Rx `filter` operator applied to the joined stream, but with LQR‑specific advantage of works on the row view, and is guaranteed to sit in the right place relative to joins and grouping.

- It does **not** change join windows or per‑key buffers.
- For each incoming row:
  - if `predicate(row)` is truthy, the row passes through;
  - otherwise it is dropped.
- Completion and errors flow through as they would for a normal Rx `filter`.

In practice:

- Tune **join windows** and **per‑key buffers** to control “what can reach where”.
- Use `where` to express “of those rows, which ones do I actually care about?”.
- The `expired()` side channel is unaffected: records dropped by `where` still age out of join/distinct/group windows as usual and will appear on `query:expired()` when their window closes.

---

## Writing good predicates

A few guidelines for `where` predicates:

- **Think SQL `WHERE`, but in Lua.**  
  Combine schema fields freely, e.g. `o.total < c.creditLine`, `zombies.count > rooms.capacity`, etc.

- **Be explicit about missing partners.**  
  Decide what “no order” or “no zombie in this room” means for your logic (drop the row, or treat it as safe).

- **Keep `where` for row‑level logic, not aggregates.**  
  `where` sees individual joined rows, not grouped aggregates. If you want to filter based on counts or sums over a group (“at least 3 orders in the last minute”), use `groupBy` / `groupByEnrich` plus `having` in the grouping stage, not `where`.

- **Keep them cheap and side‑effect light.**  
  Predicates run once per row in the stream; avoid blocking I/O or heavy work inside them.

With this mental model, `where` stays close to its SQL cousin while remaining a predictable, streaming‑friendly filter over joined rows.
